While marketers have been trying to decode the Millennial generation for years, Gen Z has been overlooked. Millennials are aging and it is time to shift the focus onto influencing the nation’s teenagers. According to the Boston Globe, Gen Z has tremendous purchasing power and consists of those who are currently under 20 years of age. At 82 million, this generation is roughly the same size as the Millennial generation and has about $44 billion to spend. Gen Z’s are radically different from previous generations because they were born into an age of technology and only know a life with the internet. While Millennials share their lives on social media, Gen Z’s live and breathe through social media, often saying “if you didn’t post it, it didn’t happen.” They are constantly connected to the digital world, digesting content every minute of the day and aware of every move that their friends make. With multiple mobile devices, Gen Z’s have mastered the art of multi-tasking, as they can be having a conversation with a parent while texting a friend and snapchatting in between.

Gen Z’s aren’t interested in being mainstream. They embrace diversity and desire to be different, unique, and the first to find the new trend. Being tech savvy, they are experts at using the internet as a tool to research and treasure hunt. Endless amounts of information provide endless opportunities, leading to an especially creative and entrepreneurial generation. Social media platforms like Instagram have influenced this generation to be extremely visual. They are experience-driven, drawn to aesthetically pleasing GoPro photos and beautiful cinematography through short videos. Curious about the lives of others, they follow famous influencers to tap into aspirational lifestyles. Gen Z’s are thrifty, as they do not spend large amounts of money on expensive brands. After watching their parents and older siblings struggle to find jobs during the recession, Gen Z’s became value conscious and independent.

With their need to be different, ability to customize the information that they receive, and value-conscious spending habits, Gen Z poses a great challenge for marketers. Traditional forms of advertising are no longer effective on this generation because Gen Z’s will not feed into direct messaging. This generation needs to be inspired and feel personally connected to a brand in order to purchase it. Marketers must shy away from advertisements and instead create content that Gen Z’s can interact with, learn new information from, and be entertained by. If brands can successfully engage with Gen Z through content marketing, Gen Z will share the content with their friends and family. Gen Z’s have a powerful ability to influence those whom they are connected to, which brands can leverage to their advantage.

Brands like Taco Bell have done extensive research and deep digging to understand the Gen Z consumer. According to AdAge, Melissa Friebe, Taco Bell’s VP of Insights Lab found that “They’ve become even more empowered, entrepreneurial and just creative.” In response, Taco Bell has created innovative content around cultural movements that resonate with Gen Z, such as “promposals,” periscope live streaming, and food mashups. The company is not afraid to try new things, surprise, and delight consumers. This is the kind of creativity that Gen Z appreciates and responds to. As Gen Z ages, behaviors and preferences will continue to evolve and it is the job of marketers to evolve with them. Brands should continue to think outside of the box, reach Gen Z from new angles, and continue to deliver engaging messages.

#BabsonPerspective

#StudentVoices